Although my parents are from UP, I was born and brought up in Punjab, and had moved to Lucknow and Ghaziabad during my schooling. I did my BSc (H) Chemistry from Ramjas College, DU in 2013 and later to Pune for my masters and PhD. I enrolled for an Int. PhD in Chemistry course from IISER Pune, and did my PhD in the field of nanoparticle self-assembly. Basically chemistry at an interface. My post PhD journey not only took me outside India, but also outside my comfort zone. After finishing my PhD in 2020, I not only moved out of India, but also out of my comfort zones. Firstly in Spain, in addition to improving my self-assembly skills, I learned nanoparticle synthesis too. Later these skills were important to try and teach similar skills to liquid handling platforms for automating both the design as well as robotic execution of experiments. In order to continue the journey out of my comfort zone, I moved to Switzerland to work with DNA origami and single particle spectroscopy.  

Write your biography here. Tell the world about yourself. Link to your favorite [subreddit](http://reddit.com). You can put a picture in, too. The code is already in, just name your picture `prof_pic.jpg` and put it in the `img/` folder.

Put your address / P.O. box / other info right below your picture. You can also disable any these elements by editing `profile` property of the YAML header of your `_pages/about.md`. Edit `_bibliography/papers.bib` and Jekyll will render your [publications page](/al-folio/publications/) automatically.

Link to your social media connections, too. This theme is set up to use [Font Awesome icons](https://fontawesome.com/) and [Academicons](https://jpswalsh.github.io/academicons/), like the ones below. Add your Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google Scholar, or just disable all of them.
