---
title: "On the introduction of historical sources in the teaching of chemistry"
date: "2022-04-14"
categories: 
  - "teaching"
  - "thoughts"
tags: 
  - "chemistry"
  - "historical-sources"
  - "inquiry"
  - "rational-inquiry"
coverImage: "pexels-photo-301926.jpeg"
---

In this post, I thought to start by sharing my growing concerns and dissatisfactions with the teaching of chemistry in schools as well as undergraduate introductory courses. The seeds of my dissatisfaction were sowed early on, when I was experiencing chemistry as an undergrad. Later, while I took my initial steps into the role of an educator (I became a teaching assistant), my dissatisfaction grew further. I do not claim to have a one-tool-fix-all-solution for the chemistry teaching, but want to put some ideas out there that can potentially find a place in the toolbox of _good chemistry teaching_. I want to use a few examples and make a case for the use of **historical sources in the teaching of chemistry**, for better teaching outcomes.

As a teaching assistant for the first-year introductory chemistry course, I was unhappy with how the chemistry textbooks were approaching the teaching of atomic structure. Atomic structure determination was, to a great extent, simply presented as a chronology of events- _something that I used to complain about history classes during my school years_. The lesson typically starts with Democritus, who just thought of atoms, followed by the entry of Dalton into the scene, whoose profound observations sound similar to commandments related with atomic theory. Later, the discovery of subatomic particles made the scientists of the day wonder about their arrangement inside a stable atom. Thomson takes a hit at this problem and proposes his plum pudding model, which gets discredited by the alpha ray scattering experiment. The story goes on and on and on.

The reason why I am unhappy with this _conventional_ way of teaching is twofold. Firstly, this approach removes the **_´hypothesize-experiment-modify\`_** way of generating information, which was very much underway at least in this scenario. This deprives the students of how fascinating the determination of atomic structure was. For instance, I was disappointed by the teaching of Thomsońs plum pudding model. It was taught as if he just very simply dreamt of electrons as plums sitting inside a pudding made up of _smeared-out_ protons. While infact he did extensive calculations about the stable orbits of electrons under both scenarios. Namely, when the positive charges are localized in chunks similar to electrons, or when the positive charge is uniformly distributed (**1**). The results of his equations were tested out to fit experimental data, where uniformly distributed proton model fitted the data better. You can now answer this honestly, whether this additional bit of knowledge enrich your appreciation for the plum pudding model or not? Moreover, don't you want to know more about the experiment that gave more weightage to the diffused positive charge model? One can go into so many tangential inquiries and enter several rabbitholes at will.

Secondly, this approach, oftentimes, not only removes logic and intuition from chemistry teaching, making it sound axiomatic, but also stays incomplete. For instance, the students are simply presented that Rutherford postulated the presence of a nucleus when he saw minuscule fractions of alpha rays bouncing back. The reason why this teaching is incomplete, is because he also told to a very high degree of accuracy, the size of the nucleus. He used simple physics logics to estimate the size of the nucleus. Students can be given the same information that Rutherford had, and can be asked to design ways of determining the size of nucleus.

Using historical sources, and introducing the abovementioned problems during the lectures, in my opinion, also introduces the importance of crosstalk between disciplines to solve problems - _much stronger introduction to interdisciplinary sciences_. Additionally, the use of simple 12th standard physics arguments to gain an extraordinary insight about dimensions of the nucleus, at a time when existence of aether was not completely disproved (**2**), seems profound right? The lack of accurate presentaiton of old results, depriving them of the necessary logic, rigour, and method that were key to know what we now know to be true, seems like a big disservice. Moreover this way of teaching can potentially install a false notion of ‘oh-science-was-so-easy-back-then’. You just have to sit and think about the plum pudding models containing smeared out protons when we now know for a fact that protons are not smeared out.

Introducing the reading of historical sources, in my opinion, can potentially be a beneficial tool in the teaching of chemistry. Students can have a better understanding about the sound, albeit incomplete logic behind the ‘**_obviously incorrect theories_**’, which can serve as good teaching models as well. For instance, while teaching electrostatics, students can be asked to calculate stable electron orbits in a uniformly charged positive shell - _Thomson did show stable arrangement of electrons inside his model_. These historical readings can be given as term papers, if it is difficult to be implemented in the course directly. The class can be divided into teams, and can be given a several topics to choose from. These term papers can later be followed by a presentation session, so as to disseminate the information easily. This practise, if done appropriately can potentially build knowledge resources that are not so easily available in textbooks, or can lead to a textbook written by the students! And with this, I think this is a good time for me to get a hold of my day-dreaming self.😅

The more I think about the utility of historical sources, the more reasons I get as to why their introduction in the classes is absolutely crucial. To say the least, students may learn to question educational authorities, and discover that the information given in books can potentially be incomplete, if not wrong (sometimes). Students will also learn the important skill of looking for and consuming new information, write your findings and present them - a good introduction to rational inquiry.

#### Sources:

1. The deflection of the β-particle will thus arise from two causes:- a. The repulsion of the negative corpuscles distributed through the atom, and b. The attraction of the positive electrification. The deflection due to the latter will depend upon whether the positive electricity is uniformly distributed through the atom, or whether it is divided up into small units. Prof. Thomson considers each of these suppositions separately. It will be sufficient here to give the results which he arrives at... (Excerpt taken from Crowther's work (1910), Page-229. [Link](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/epdf/10.1098/rspa.1910.0074)).
2. The negative outcome of the [Michelson–Morley experiment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michelson%E2%80%93Morley_experiment) (1887) **suggested** that the aether did not exist, **a finding that was confirmed in subsequent experiments through the 1920s**. ([Link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luminiferous_aether#:~:text=By%20the%20late%201800s%2C%20the,subsequent%20experiments%20through%20the%201920s.)).
